feat: escort policy (#2)
open-autonomy/escort: specification/V1/EscortPositionUpdateV1.md

# EscortPositionUpdateV1

This message is sent by the Fleet Management System (FMS) to the Autonomous Haulage System (AHS) at a nominal frequency of 1 Hz to report current position and motion state of the active Escorter. It enables Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) to maintain and update their Avoidance Zone relative to the Protection Zone.

| Sender | Triggered by | Triggers |
| --- | --- | --- |
| FMS | Escort Pending or Active (after [ActivateEscortRequestV1](ActivateEscortRequestV1.md)) and periodic (every ~1 s) | Provides latest Escorter pose for AV prediction & Avoidance Zone constraint |

## Message Attributes

> The `EscortPositionUpdateV1` payload object contains the following properties (top-level message header fields such as `Protocol`, `Version`, `Timestamp`, `EquipmentId`, and `EscorterId` are defined in `MessageHeader.md`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `EscortPositionUpdateV1` payload object contains the following properties (top-level message header fields such as `Protocol`, `Version`, `Timestamp`, and `EquipmentId` are defined in `MessageHeader.md`).

```
See below.

| Key | Req. Level | Type | Unit / Format | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `"EscortId"` | shall | UUID | UUID | Identifier of the Escort instance |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `"EscorterId"` | shall | UUID | UUID | Identifier of the Escorter Vehicle |

```
The examples all use `EscorterId`, is this correct? As a standalone message will `EquipmentId == EscorterId`? If so, I can see how it makes sense to send `EscortId` instead.

Reviewer 2: `EscortID` is correct. `EquipmentID` refers to the AV that the position update is being sent to.

| `"GPSMilliSecondInWeek"` | shall | uint32 | millisecond in GPS Week | millisecond in GPS Week when the position sample was measured (NOT when message transmitted) |
| `"V2XStationId"` | should  | string | Id | Unique ID on redundant network channel i.e. V2X |
| `"Latitude"` | shall | double | degrees (WGS84) | 6+ decimal places (≈0.11 m). |
| `"Longitude"` | shall | double | degrees (WGS84) | 6+ decimal places. |
| `"Elevation"` | shall | double | meters | Elevation relative to WGS84 ellipsoid (2 decimals). |
| `"Heading"` | shall | double | degrees | 0–359; 0 = true north, clockwise increase. |
| `"Speed"` | shall | double | m/s | Instantaneous ground speed (consider conversion from native km/h). |
| `"LatitudeAccuracy"` | shall | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma horizontal positional accuracy latitude component. |
| `"LongitudeAccuracy"` | shall | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma horizontal positional accuracy longitude component. |
| `"ElevationAccuracy"` | shall | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma vertical accuracy. |
| `"HeadingAccuracy"` | shall | double | degrees (1σ) | 1‑sigma heading accuracy. |

> | `"SpeedAccuracy"` | shall | double | m/s (1σ) | 1‑sigma speed accuracy. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `"LatitudeAccuracy"` | should | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma horizontal positional accuracy latitude component. |
| `"LongitudeAccuracy"` | should | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma horizontal positional accuracy longitude component. |
| `"ElevationAccuracy"` | should  | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma vertical accuracy. |
| `"HeadingAccuracy"` | should | double | degrees (1σ) | 1‑sigma heading accuracy. |
| `"SpeedAccuracy"` | should  | double | m/s (1σ) | 1‑sigma speed accuracy. |
```

Reviewer 2: Flagged for further discussion.

> [!NOTE]
> - Accuracy fields help AVs tune dynamic buffer growth.

> [!NOTE]
> Why V2X StationId?
> - V2X CAM messages can be received with smaller latency than the `EscortPositionUpdateV1` messages therefore StationId of the Escorter is a valuable information to the AV.
>
> Why V2X StationId in Position Update Message?
> - V2X StationIds change regularly therefore this is part of the update rather than the activation message.

## Example
```json
{
  "Protocol": "Open-Autonomy",
  "Version": 1,
  "Timestamp": "2025-10-20T10:15:30.125Z",

>   "EquipmentId": "f0c3d5ab-2d6e-4a12-b9d9-9eaf1efc0abc",

Reviewer: This message is being sent once to the AHS (not for each AV as with Activate)? If so, is `EquipmentId` required, or will it be the same as the `EscorterId`?

# EscortPositionUpdateV1

This message is sent by the Fleet Management System (FMS) to the Autonomous Haulage System (AHS) at a frequency of 1 Hz to report the current position and motion state of the active escorting vehicle (Escorter). The purpose is to enable all Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) to maintain an up‑to‑date dynamic protection zone around the escort.

| Sender | Triggered by | Triggers |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `FMS` | Escort activation (immediately after sending `ActivateEscortRequestV1`) and every 1 s while active | AHS to forward/update internal AV state used for protection zone maintenance |

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > FMS SHALL begin sending `EscortPositionUpdateV1` messages immediately after transmitting an `ActivateEscortRequestV1` (shall NOT wait for any `ActivateEscortResponseV1`).

Reviewer 3: I agree that the FMS should begin sending updates immediately.

I don't agree with the emphasis, or that this is a 'Shall' statement. This is unimportant from the point of view of the interface specification.

Reviewer 4: Updated in https://github.com/open-autonomy/escort/pull/6

>

> > If more than 2 consecutive `EscortPositionUpdateV1` messages are missed (configurable), AVs MAY expand protection margins or fail-safe according to site request.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this belongs here. I think this type of information should be covered on the main page with the definition of the AV Avoidance Zone.

Reviewer 4: Updated in https://github.com/open-autonomy/escort/pull/6

## Message Attributes

The `EscortPositionUpdateV1` payload object contains the following properties (top-level message header fields such as `Protocol`, `Version`, `Timestamp`, `EquipmentIds`, and `EscorterId` are defined in `MessageHeader.md`).

| Key | Req. Level | Type | Unit / Format | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `"EscorterId"` | shall | UUID | UUID | Identifier of the Escorter Vehicle |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `"EscortId"` | shall | UUID | UUID | Identifier of the Escort instance |
```

> | `"GPSWeek"` | shall | uint32 | GPS Week | GPS Week when the position sample was measured (NOT when message transmitted) |

Reviewer 3: @suddrey, @nick0pen TBD

| `"GPSMilliSecondInWeek"` | shall | uint32 | millisecond in GPS Week | millisecond in GPS Week when the position sample was measured (NOT when message transmitted) |

> | `"V2XStationId"` | should  | uint32 | StationId | V2X StationId of the Escorter SIV |

Reviewer 3: Can we / should we make this more generic?

This can be generalized as the equipment id for the secondary source of position updates.

| `"Latitude"` | shall | double | degrees (WGS84) | 6+ decimal places (≈0.11 m). |
| `"Longitude"` | shall | double | degrees (WGS84) | 6+ decimal places. |
| `"Elevation"` | shall | double | meters | Elevation relative to WGS84 ellipsoid (2 decimals). |
| `"Heading"` | shall | double | degrees | 0–359; 0 = true north, clockwise increase. |
| `"Speed"` | shall | double | m/s | Instantaneous ground speed (consider conversion from native km/h). |
| `"LatitudeAccuracy"` | should | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma horizontal positional accuracy latitude component. |
| `"LongitudeAccuracy"` | should | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma horizontal positional accuracy longitude component. |
| `"ElevationAccuracy"` | should | double | meters (1σ) | 1‑sigma vertical accuracy. |
| `"HeadingAccuracy"` | should | double | degrees (1σ) | 1‑sigma heading accuracy. |
| `"SpeedAccuracy"` | should | double | m/s (1σ) | 1‑sigma speed accuracy. |

> [!NOTE]
> - At minimum: `EscorterId`, `GPSWeek`, `GPSMilliSecondInWeek`, `Latitude`, `Longitude`, `Elevation`, `Heading`, `Speed` MUST be present.

> > - Accuracy fields help AVs tune dynamic buffer growth; include when available.

Reviewer 3: Suggest accuracy fields are required

Reviewer 4: Updated in https://github.com/open-autonomy/escort/pull/6

> - V2X CAM messages can be received with smaller latency than the `EscortPositionUpdateV1` messages therefore StationId of the Escorter is a valuable information to the AV.

## Example
```JSON
{
  "Protocol": "Open-Autonomy",
  "Version": 1,
  "Timestamp": "2025-09-26T10:15:30.125Z",
  "EquipmentIds": [
    "f0c3d5ab-2d6e-4a12-b9d9-9eaf1efc0abc",
    "9b8b6d54-1234-4c81-a911-5555bbbb7777"
  ],
  "EscortPositionUpdateV1": {
    "EscorterId": "11111111-2222-3333-4444-555555555555",
    "GpsWeek": 2444,
    "GpsMilliSecondInWeek": 345678900,
    "V2XStationId": 23983958,
    "Latitude": 59.1546127,
    "Longitude": 17.6212361,
    "Elevation": 428.32,
    "Heading": 87.8,
    "Speed": 4.2,
    "LatitudeAccuracy": 0.8,
    "LongitudeAccuracy": 0.9,
    "ElevationAccuracy": 1.5,
    "HeadingAccuracy": 2.0,
    "SpeedAccuracy": 0.2,
  }
}
```

## Validation Rules
- SHALL be published at 1 Hz (±100 ms tolerance recommended).
- SHALL monotonically increase `Timestamp` (no duplicates or regressions within a session).
- SHALL include `Speed` even if zero.
- If accuracy metrics are unknown, omit the respective fields rather than sending zero.

## Failure / Degradation Handling

> // Document how the system should respond to message loss, unavailable data, or degraded sensor quality.

Reviewer 5: Is this a TODO comment that should be removed or set as "TODO:"

Reviewer 4: Updated
